---
title: Pupil dilation indexes auditory spatial attention switching
runningtitle: Pupillometry and attention switching
titlenote: Portions of the research described here were previously presented at the 37th Annual MidWinter Meeting of the Association for Research in Otolaryngology, and published in McCloy et al (2016), Temporal alignment of pupillary response with stimulus events via deconvolution, J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 139(3), EL57-EL62.
author:
- name: Daniel R. McCloy
- name: Bonnie Lau
- name: Eric D. Larson
- name: Katherine Ingle
- name: Adrian K. C. Lee
  email: akclee@uw.edu
  affiliation:
  - Institute for Learning and Brain Sciences, University of Washington, 1715 NE Columbia Rd., Box 357988, Seattle, WA, 98195-7988
documentclass: article
classoption: oneside
fontsize: 12pt
geometry:
- letterpaper
- margin=1in
header: McCloy, JASA
pacs:
- 43.71.Qr <!-- Neurophysiology of speech perception -->
- 43.66.Ba <!-- Models and theories of auditory processes -->
- 43.71.Sy <!-- Spoken language processing by humans -->
biblio-style: bibstyle
bibliography: bib/switching
possible-reviewers: Thomas Koelewijn, Matt Winn
abstract: Successful speech communication often requires selective attention to a target stream in the presence of competing sounds, as well as the ability to switch attention among multiple interlocutors.  However, auditory attention switching has been shown to negatively affect both target detection accuracy and reaction time [Larson & Lee 2013, J. Acoust. Soc. Am., 134, EL165-171], suggesting that attention switches carry a cognitive cost.  One tool for assessing cognitive effort or load is the measurement of pupil diameter.  Two experiments were conducted to determine whether the pupillary response is sensitive to auditory attention switches.  In both experiments, pupil dilation, performance accuracy, and reaction time were measured during a task requiring listeners to either maintain or switch attention between two concurrent speech streams.  Task difficulty was modulated in various ways to explore its effect on the pupillary response during attention switching tasks.  In Experiment 1, spatially distinct stimuli were manipulated by simulating reverberation (affecting the integrity of temporal segregation cues), and target/masker gender match was also manipulated.  In Experiment 2, non-spatial stimuli separable by talker voice quality and pitch were manipulated by spectral degradation and altering the duration of the mid-trial switch gap.  Pupil responses showed greater dilation on trials requiring switching attention between talkers, demonstrating that the attentional switch is reflected in the pupillary response.  Furthermore, while the stimulus manipulations had an effect on behavioral performance, the pupillary response was affected only by the top-down attentional task.
---
<!-- 43.66.Qp Localization of sound sources -->
<!-- 43.71.An Models and theories of speech perception (see also 43.66.Ba) -->
<!-- 43.71.Rt Sensory mechanisms in speech perception -->
<!-- 43.66.Pn Binaural hearing -->

# Introduction

The ability to selectively attend to a target speech stream in the presence of
competing sounds is required to communicate in everyday listening environments.
In many situations (e.g., a lively debate around the dinner table), the ability
to rapidly switch attention among multiple interlocutors is also necessary for
successful communication.  Some evidence suggests that attention is a necessary
prerequisite for auditory stream formation,[@ShammaEtAl2011] and for listeners
with peripheral hearing deficits, changes in the encoding of stimuli often
result in impaired selective attention and consequent difficulty communicating
in noisy environments.[@ShinnCunninghamBest2008]  Larson and Lee showed that
when cueing listeners in a target detection task to either maintain attention
to one stream or switch attention to the other stream mid-trial, switching
attention both reduced accuracy and led to longer response latency *even on
targets prior to the attentional switch*.[@LarsonLee2013a]  This suggests that
the act of remembering or preparing to switch imposes some degree of effort or
load on the listener.

Pupillometry, the tracking of pupil diameter, has been used for over four
decades to measure cognitive load.[@KahnemanBeatty1966; @Beatty1982]  Pupil
dilation is an involuntary, time-locked, externally-evoked physiological
response that is present from infancy in humans and other animal species. In
general, as the cognitive demands of a task increases, pupil dilation of up to
about 5-6 mm can be observed up to 1 second after onset of relevant
stimuli.[@KahnemanBeatty1966; @Beatty1982; @HoeksLevelt1993]  While pupil
dilation is slow (~1 Hz), recent results show that tracking of attention and
cognitive processes with high temporal resolution (~10 Hz) is possible with
deconvolution of the pupillary response.[@WierdaEtAl2012; @McCloyEtAl2016]

Classic studies show that pupil dilation can be elicited with increases in
cognitive load resulting from greater memory demands,[@Taylor1981] sentence
complexity,[@AhernBeatty1981] or more difficult mathematical
operations.[@HessPolt1964]  In the auditory domain, changes in pupil dilation
have been reported with decreased speech intelligibility,[@ZekveldEtAl2010]
different masker types [@KoelewijnEtAl2012], lexical properties of
words,[@PapeshGoldinger2012] spectral degradation,[@WinnEtAl2015] as well as
the expected location, temporal onset and talker of a speech
stream.[@KoelewijnEtAl2015]  The pupillary response has also emerged as a
measure of listening effort, which refers to “the mental exertion required to
attend to, and understand, an auditory message”.[@McGarrigleEtAl2014]  In this
guise, pupillometry has been used in several studies to investigate the effects
of age and hearing loss on listening effort.[@ZekveldEtAl2011;
@KuchinskyEtAl2013; @WinnEtAl2015]

Recent evidence suggests that the pupillary response is also sensitive to
auditory attention.[@KoelewijnEtAl2014; @KoelewijnEtAl2015]  When listeners are
asked to divide their attention between two concurrent speech streams as
opposed to attending to a single stream, a decrease in task performance is
typically observed;[@BestEtAl2010; @KoelewijnEtAl2014] Koelewijn and colleagues
additionally reported greater pupil dilation and later peak pupil latency when
listeners were asked to attend to both speech streams present in the stimulus
compared to attending to only one stream.[@KoelewijnEtAl2014]

The present study was designed to investigate whether the pupillary response is
also sensitive to attention switches.  Pupil dilation was measured while
listeners heard two speech streams, with pre-trial cues instructing them to
either switch attention from one stream to the other at a designated mid-trial
gap, or to maintain attention on the same stream throughout the trial.
Extrapolating from the divided attention results of Koelewijn and
colleagues,[@KoelewijnEtAl2014] we predicted greater pupil dilation on trials
that required attention switching.

# General Methods
All procedures were performed in a sound-treated booth; illumination was
provided only by the LCD monitor that presented instructions and fixation
points. Auditory stimuli were sent via a TDT RP2 real-time processor (Tucker
Davis Technologies, Alachula, FL) to Etymotic ER-2 insert earphones at a level
of 65 dB SPL. Pupil size was measured continuously during each block of trials
at a 1000 Hz sampling frequency using an EyeLink1000 infra-red eye tracker (SR
Research, Kanata, ON). Participants’ heads were stabilized by a chin rest and
forehead bar, fixing their eyes at a distance of 50 cm from the EyeLink camera.
Target detection accuracy and response time were also recorded for comparison
with pupillometry data and the results of past studies.

# Experiment 1
In addition to the behavioral maintain-versus-switch manipulation, Experiment 1
included a cued stimulus manipulation expected to cause variation in task demand:
temporal resolution of the stimuli (implemented as presence/absence of simulated
reverberation). Greater pupil dilation was expected in the reverberant condition.
Additionally, the gender of the competing talker was varied (either the same male
voice as the target talker, or a female voice, uncued). <!-- TODO: mention
release from masking due to talker dissimilarity, expectation of smaller dilation
in MF condition. -->

## Methods
### Participants
Sixteen adults (ten female) aged 21 to 35 years (mean 25.1) participated in
Experiment 1. All participants had normal audiometric thresholds (20 dB HL or
better at octave frequencies from 250 Hz to 8 kHz), were compensated at an
hourly rate, and gave informed consent to participate as overseen by the
University of Washington Institutional Review Board.

### Stimuli

Stimuli were based on spoken alphabet letters ABIJKMOQRUXY from the ISOLET v1.3
corpus[@ColeEtAl1990] from one female and one male talker. Mean fundamental
frequencies of the unprocessed recordings were 103 Hz (male talker) and 193 Hz
(female talker). Letter durations ranged from 351 to 478 ms, and were
silence-padded to a uniform duration of 500 ms, RMS normalized, and windowed at
the edges with a 5 ms cosine-squared envelope. Two streams of four letters each
were generated for each trial, with a gap of 600 ms between the second and
third letters of each stream. The letters “A” and “B” were used only in the
pre-trial cues (described below); the target letter was “O” and letters
“IJKMQRUXY” were non-target items.  To allow unambiguous attribution of button
presses, the letter “O” was always separated from another “O” (in either
stream) by at least 1 second; thus there were between zero and two “O” tokens
per trial.  The position of “O” tokens in the letter sequence was balanced
across trials and conditions, with approximately 40% of all “O” tokens occuring
in the third letter slot (just after the switch gap, since that slot is most
likely to be affected by attention switches), and approximately 20% in each of
the other three timing slots.

Reverberation was implemented using binaural room impulse responses (BRIRs)
recorded by Shinn-Cunningham and colleagues.[@ShinnCunninghamEtAl2005] Briefly,
an “anechoic” condition was created by processing the stimuli with BRIRs
truncated to include only the direct impulse response and exclude reverberant
energy, while stimuli for the “reverberant” condition were processed with the
full BRIRs. In both conditions, the BRIRs recorded at ±45° for each stream were
used, simulating a separation of 90° azimuth between target and masker streams.
A white-noise masker with π-interaural-phase was played continuously during
experimental blocks at a level of 45 dB SPL, yielding a stimulus-to-noise ratio
of 20 dB. The additional noise was included to provide masking of environmental
sounds (e.g., friction between subject clothing and earphone tubes) and to
provide consistency with follow-up neuroimaging experiments (required due to
the acoustic conditions in the neuroimaging suite).

### Procedure
Participants were instructed to fixate on a white dot centered on a black
screen and maintain such gaze throughout test blocks. Each trial began with a 1
second auditory cue (spoken letters “AA” or “AB”); the cue was always in a male
voice, and its spatial location indicated to attend first to the male talker at
that location. The letters spoken in the cue indicated whether to maintain
attention to the cue talker’s location throughout the trial (“AA” cue) or to
switch attention to the talker at the other spatial location at the mid-trial
gap (“AB” cue). The cue was followed by 0.5 s of silence, followed by the main
portion of the trial: two concurrent 4-letter streams with simulated spatial
separation (either the same male voice in both streams, or one male and one
female voice), with a 600 ms gap between the second and third letters. The task
was to respond by button press to the letter “O” spoken by the target talker
(Figure \ref{fig-rev-trial}).

![(Color online) Illustration of “maintain” and “switch” trial types in Experiment 1. In the depicted “switch” trial (heavy dashed line), listeners would hear cue “AB” in a male voice, attend to the male voice (“QU”) for the first half of the trial and the female voice (“OM”) for the second half of the trial, and respond once (to the “O” occurring at 3.1–3.6 s).  In the depicted “maintain” trial (heavy solid line), listeners would hear cue “AA” in a male voice, attend to the male voice (“QUJR”) throughout the trial, and not respond at all.  In the depicted trials, a button press during timing slot 2 would be counted as response to the “O” at 2-2.5 s, which is a “foil” in both trial types illustrated.  A button press during timing slot 3 would be counted as response to the “O” at 3.1-3.6 s, which is considered a target in the switch-attention trial and a foil in the maintain-attention trial. Note that “O” tokens never occurred in immediately adjacent timing slots (unless separated by the switch gap) so response attribution was unambiguous.\label{fig-rev-trial}](fig-trial-rev.eps)

Before starting the experimental task, participants heard 2 blocks of 10 trials
for familiarization with anechoic and reverberant speech (one with a single
talker, one with two simultaneous talkers). Next, listeners did 3 training
blocks of 10 trials each (one block of “maintain” trials, one block of “switch”
trials, and one block of randomly mixed “maintain” and “switch” trials).
Training blocks were repeated until participants achieved ≥50% of trials
correct on the homogenous blocks and ≥40% of trials correct on the mixed block.
During testing, the three experimental conditions (maintain/switch,
anechoic/reverberant speech, and male-male versus male-female talker
combinations) were counterbalanced and randomly presented in 10 blocks of 32
trials each, for a total of 320 trials.

### Behavioral analysis
\label{sec-meth-beh}
Listener responses were labeled as “hits” if the button press occurred between
100 and 1000 ms after the onset of “O” stimuli in the target stream.  Responses
at any other time during the trial were considered “false alarms”. False alarm
responses occurring between 100 and 1000 ms following the onset of “O” stimuli
in the *masker stream* were additionally labeled as “responses to foils” to aid
in assessing failures to selectively attend to the target stream.  As
illustrated in Figure \ref{fig-rev-trial}, the response windows for adjacent
letters partially overlap in time; in such cases the ambiguity was resolved by
assuming that listeners were responding to an “O” if an “O” onset had occurred
(either as target or foil) in the 1000 ms preceding the response.  If no “O”
tokens had occurred in that period of time, the response was coded as a false
alarm for the purpose of calculating sensitivity, but no reaction time was
computed (in other words, only responses to targets and foils were considered
in the reaction time analysis).

Listener sensitivity and reaction time were analyzed with (generalized) linear
mixed-effects regression models, using packages `afex`[@afex] (version
`0.16.1`) and `lme4`[@BatesEtAl2015] (version `1.1.12`) in the `R` statistical
computing environment.[@R3.3.1]  A model for listener sensitivity was
constructed to predict probability of button press at each timing slot (four
timing slots per trial, see Figure \ref{fig-rev-trial}) from the interaction
among the fixed-effect predictors specifying trial parameters (maintain/switch,
anechoic/reverberant, and gender match/mismatch) and an indicator variable
encoding whether a target, foil, or neither was present in the timing slot.  A
random intercept was also estimated for each listener.  An inverse probit link
function was used to transform button press probabilities (bounded between 0
and 1) into unbounded continuous values suitable for linear modeling.  Full
model specification is given in the supplementary material;
<!-- TODO: add crossref to supplementary material -->
the general form of this model is given in (@eq-mod-probit), where $\Phi^{-1}$
is the inverse probit link function, $Pr(Y = 1)$ is the probability of button
press, $X$ is the design matrix of trial parameters and indicator variables,
and $\beta$ is the vector of parameter coefficients to be estimated.

(@eq-mod-probit)  $\Phi^{-1}(Pr(Y = 1 \mid X)) = X^\prime \beta$

This model has the convenient advantage that coefficient estimates are
interpretable as differences in bias and sensitivity on a $d^\prime$ scale
resulting from the various experimental manipulations.[@DeCarlo1998;
@SheuEtAl2008; @McCloyLee2015]  Reaction time was analyzed using linear
mixed-effects regression (i.e., without a link function) but was otherwise
analyzed similarly to listener sensitivity.  Significance of predictors in the
reaction time model was computed via F-tests using the Kenward-Roger
approximation for degrees of freedom; significance in the sensitivity model was
determined by likelihood ratio tests between models with and without the
predictor of interest (as the Kenward-Roger approximation has not been
demonstrated to work with non-normally-distributed response variables, i.e.,
when modeling probabilities).

### Analysis of pupil diameter
Recordings of pupil diameter for each trial were epoched from −0.5 to 6 s, with
0 s defined as the onset of the pre-trial cue. Periods where eye blinks were
detected by the EyeLink software were linearly interpolated from 25 ms before
blink onset to 100 ms after blink offset. Epochs were normalized by subtracting
the mean pupil size between −0.5 and 0 s on each trial, and dividing by the
standard deviation of pupil size across all trials.

Normalized pupil size data were then deconvolved with a pupil impulse response
kernel.[@WierdaEtAl2012; @McCloyEtAl2016]  Briefly, the pupil response kernel
represents the stereotypical time course of a pupillary response to an isolated
stimulus, modeled as an Erlang gamma function with empirically-determined
parameters $t_\mathrm{max}$ (latency of response maximum) and $n$ (Erlang shape
parameter).[@HoeksLevelt1993]  The parameters used here were
$t_\mathrm{max}=0.512 s$ and $n=10.1$ following previous
literature.[@McCloyEtAl2016]  

Fourier analysis of the subject-level mean pupil size data and the
deconvolution kernel indicated virtually no energy at frequencies above 3 Hz,
so for computational efficiency the deconvolution was realized as a best-fit
linear sum of kernels spaced at 100 ms intervals (similar to downsampling both
signal and kernel to 10 Hz prior to deconvolution), as implemented in the
pyeparse software.[@pyeparse]  After deconvolution, the resulting time series
can be thought of as an indicator of listener arousal or effort that is
time-aligned to the stimulus (i.e., the response latency of the pupil has been
effectively removed).  Statistical comparison of effort (i.e., deconvolved
pupil dilation) time series was performed using a non-parametric cluster-level
one-sample T-test on the within-subject differences in deconvolved pupil size
between experimental conditions (clustering across time
only),[@MarisOostenveld2007], as implemented in
`mne-python`.[@GramfortEtAl2013]

## Results

### Sensitivity analysis
Box-and-swarm plots displaying quartile and individual $d^\prime$ values are
shown in Figure \ref{fig-rev-dprime}.  The statistical model indicated
significant main effects for all three trial type manipulations, as seen in
Figure \ref{fig-rev-dprime}a, with effect sizes around 0.2 to 0.3 on a
$d^\prime$ scale.  Model results indicate that the attentional manipulation led
to more responses to both targets and foils in maintain- versus
switch-attention trials, though the net effect was an increase in $d^\prime$ in
the maintain attention condition for nearly all listeners.  For the reverberant
trials, the model indicated that listeners were better at detecting targets
in the anechoic trials, but there was no significant difference in response to
foils between anechoic and reverberant trials.  For talker gender (mis)match,
the model indicated both better target detection and fewer responses to
foils when the target and masker talkers had different genders.  The model also
indicated a two-way interaction between reverberation and talker gender, seen
in Figure \ref{fig-rev-dprime}b: somewhat paradoxically, the difference between
anechoic and reverberant trials was smaller when the target and masker talkers
were of different genders.  The three-way interaction among attention,
reverberation, and talker gender was not significant.

![(Color online) Box-and-swarm plots of between-condition differences in listener sensitivity for Experiment 1.  Boxes show first & third quartiles and median values; individual data points correspond to each listener; asterisks indicate comparisons with corresponding coefficients in the statistical model that were significantly different from zero.  (a) Main effects of attention (higher sensitivity in maintain than switch trials), reverberation (higher sensitivity in anechoic than reverberant trials), and talker gender (mis)match (higher sensitivity in trials with different gendered target and masker talkers).  (b) Two-way interactions; the difference between anechoic and reverberant trials was higher in the gender-match (MM) condition.  (c) Three-way interaction (no statistically significant differences).  ** = _p_<0.01; *** = _p_<0.001; MM = matching talker genders; MF = mismatched talker genders.\label{fig-rev-dprime}](fig-beh-rev.eps)

### Reaction time
Box-and-swarm plots showing quartile and individual reaction time values are
shown in Figure \ref{fig-rev-rt}.  The statistical model indicated a
significant main effect of attentional condition, with faster response times
(by approximately 14 ms on average) to targets in maintain-attention trials
versus switch-attention trials.  No other significant differences in reaction
time were observed.

![(Color online) Box-and-swarm plots of between-condition differences in reaction time for Experiment 1.  Boxes show first & third quartiles and median values; individual data points correspond to each listener; asterisks indicate comparisons with corresponding coefficients in the statistical model that were significantly different from zero.  (a) Main effects of attention (faster reaction time in maintain than switch trials), reverberation, and talker gender (mis)match.  (b) Two-way interactions (no statistically significant differences).  (c) Three-way interaction (no statistically significant differences).  * = _p_<0.05; MM = matching talker genders; MF = mismatched talker genders.\label{fig-rev-rt}](fig-beh-rev-rt.eps)

### Pupillometry
Mean effort as a function of time for the three stimulus manipulations
(reverberant/anechoic trials, talker gender match/mismatch trials, and
maintain/switch attention trials) are shown in Figure \ref{fig-rev-pupil}. Only
the attentional manipulation shows a significant difference between conditions,
with “switch attention” trials showing greater effort than “maintain attention”
trials.  Effort diverges as soon as listeners have heard the cue and remains higher
throughout the rest of the trial.

![(Color online) Mean ±1 standard error across subjects of deconvolved pupil size for (a) reverberant versus anechoic trials, (b) talker gender-match versus -mismatch trials, and (c) maintain- versus switch-attention trials, with trial schematics showing the timecourse of stimulus events (compare to Fig. \ref{fig-rev-trial}). Hatched region shows temporal span of statistically significant differences between time series. The onset of statistically significant divergence (vertical dotted line) of the maintain/switch conditions aligns with the end of the cue. a.u. = arbitrary units (deconvolution procedure yields “kernel weights” at each time point, which are interpretable as listener effort).\label{fig-rev-pupil}](pupil-fig-rev.eps)

## Discussion
The model of listener sensitivity showed main effects in the expected
directions for all three manipulations: put simply, listener sensitivity was
better when the talkers had different voices, when there was no reverberation,
and when mid-trial switching of attention was not required.  
The difference between anechoic and reverberant trials was
*smaller* in trials where the talkers had different voices, suggesting that the
advantage of anechoic conditions and the advantage due to talker voice
differences are not strictly additive.  A possible explanation for this finding
is that *either* talker voice difference *or* anechoic conditions are
sufficient to support auditory source separation and streaming, but the
presence of both conditions cannot overcome difficulty arising from other
aspects of the task.  Equivalently, one might say that *both* segregating two
talkers with the same voice *and* segregating two talkers in highly reverberant
conditions are hard tasks, which when combined make for a task even more
difficult than would be expected if the manipulations were additive (i.e.,
reverberation hurts performance more when both talkers are male).

The model of reaction time showed a main effect of attention, with slightly
faster reaction times in maintain-attention trials than in switch-attention
trials.  The mean difference between these conditions was approximately 14 ms.
Post-hoc analysis showed that reaction time did not differ between maintain-
and switch-attention trials for responses occurring *before* the switch gap
(Welch’s independent *t*-tests, uncorrected: *p*=0.74 for slot 1 and *p*=0.53
for slot 2) but did significantly differ for responses occurring *after* the
switch gap (*p*<0.001 for slot 3 and *p*=0.035 for slot 4).  This is consistent
with a view that the act of attention switching creates a lag or slow-down in
auditory perception, which takes on the order of 1 s to recover from.

Congruent with the reaction time results (and in contrast to listener
sensitivity), the pupillary response differed only in response to the
attentional manipulation.  This situation might arise if, for normal hearing
listeners, reverberation and talker gender mismatch are not serious enough
degradations to cause sufficient extra effort or load to be observable in the
pupillary response (in other words, the pupillary response may reflect the same
processes as the behavioral signal, but may not be as sensitive).  However, the
magnitude of the effect size in $d^\prime$ is roughly equal for the three main
effects (see Figure \ref{fig-rev-dprime}a), making this explanation unlikely.
Another possibility is that the elevated pupil response is simply due to a
higher number of button presses in the switch trials; however, the number of
button presses is in fact higher in the maintain-attention condition.
A third possibility is that the pupil dilation only reflects certain kinds of
effort or load, and that stimulus degradations that mainly affect listener
ability to form and select auditory streams are not reflected in the pupillary
response, whereas differences in listener attentional state (such as preparing
for a mid-trial attention switch) are reflected in the pupil.  Experiment 2
tests this latter explanation, by increasing stimulus degradation to further
impair formation and selection of auditory streams.

# Experiment 2
Since no effect of talker gender on pupil dilation was seen in Experiment 1, in
Experiment 2 the target and masker talkers were always of opposite gender, and
their status as target or masker was counterbalanced across trials.  Since no
effect of reverberation on pupillary response was seen in Experiment 1,
Experiment 2 also removed the simulated spatial separation of talkers and
involved a more severe cued stimulus degradation known to cause variation in
task demand: spectral degradation (implemented as variation in number of
noise-vocoder channels, 10 or 20).  Based on results from Winn and colleagues
showing increased dilation for low versus high numbers of vocoder channels with
full-sentence stimuli,[@WinnEtAl2015] greater pupil dilation was expected here
in the (more difficult, lower-intelligibility) 10-channel condition.  The cued
behavioral maintain-versus-switch manipulation from Experiment 1 was retained
in Experiment 2, and additionally, the duration of the mid-trial temporal gap
provided for attention switching was varied (either 200 ms or 600 ms,
uncued).  Behavioral and neuroimaging research by Larson and Lee suggest that
the time course of attention switching in the auditory domain is around 300-400
ms;[@LarsonLee2013a; @LarsonLee2013b] accordingly, we expected the 200 ms
switch gap to be challenging and thus predicted greater pupil dilation in
short-gap trials (though only in the post-gap portion of the trial).

## Methods

### Participants
Sixteen adults (eight female) aged 19 to 35 years (mean 25.5) participated in
Experiment 2. All participants had normal audiometric thresholds (20 dB HL or
better at octave frequencies from 250 Hz to 8 kHz), were compensated at an
hourly rate, and gave informed consent to participate as overseen by the
University of Washington Institutional Review Board.

### Stimuli
Stimuli were based on spoken alphabet letters ADEGOPUV from the ISOLET v1.3
corpus[@ColeEtAl1990] from the same female and male talkers used in Experiment
1, with the same stimulus preprocessing steps (padding, loudness normalization,
and edge windowing).  Two streams of four letters each were generated for each
trial, with a gap of either 200 or 600 ms between the second and third letters
of each stream. The letters “A” and “U” were used only in the pre-trial cues
(described below); the target letter was “O” and letters “DEGPV” were
non-target items.  The cue and non-target letters differed from those used in
Experiment 1 in order to maintain good discriminability of cue, target, and
non-target letters even under the most degraded (10-channel vocoder) condition.

Spectral degradation was implemented following a conventional noise vocoding
strategy.[@ShannonEtAl1995]  The stimuli were fourth-order bandpass filtered
into 10 or 20 spectral bands of equal equivalent rectangular
bandwidths;[@MooreGlasberg1987] the filterbank ranged from 200 Hz to 8000 Hz
(low cutoff of the lowest filter to high cutoff of the highest filter). Each
band was half-wave rectified and low-pass filtered with a 160 Hz fourth-order
Butterworth filter to extract the amplitude envelope. The resulting amplitude
envelopes were used to modulate white noise that had been bandpass filtered
with the same filters used to extract the speech bands, and the resulting
modulated noise bands were summed and presented diotically at 65 dB SPL.  A
simultaneous white-noise masker was presented as in Experiment 1.

### Procedure
Participants were instructed to fixate on a white dot centered on a black
screen and maintain such gaze throughout test blocks. Each trial began with a 1
second auditory cue (spoken letters “AA” or “AU”); the gender of the cue’s
talker indicated whether to attend first to the male or female voice, and
additionally indicating whether to maintain attention to that talker throughout
the trial (“AA” cue) or to switch attention to the other talker at the
mid-trial gap (“AU” cue). The cue was followed by 0.5 s of silence, followed by
the main portion of the trial: two concurrent, diotic 4-letter streams (one
male voice, one female voice), with a variable-duration gap between the second
and third letters. The task was to respond by button press to the letter “O”
spoken by the target talker (Figure \ref{fig-voc-trial}). To allow
unambiguous attribution of button presses, the letter “O” was always separated
from another “O” (in either stream) by at least 1 second, and its position in
the letter sequence was balanced across trials and conditions.  Distribution of
targets and foils across timing slots was equivalent to Experiment 1.

![(Color online) Illustration of “maintain” and “switch” trial types in Experiment 2. The short-gap version is depicted; timing of long-gap elements (where different) are shown with faint dashed lines. In the depicted “switch” trial (heavy dashed line), listeners would hear cue “AU” in a male voice, attend to the male voice (“EO”) for the first half of the trial and the female voice (“DE”) for the second half of the trial, and respond once (to the “O” occurring at 2–2.5 seconds). In the depicted “maintain” trial (heavy solid line), listeners would hear cue “AA” in a male voice, attend to the male voice (“EOPO”) throughout the trial, and respond twice (once for each “O”).\label{fig-voc-trial}](fig-trial-voc.eps)

Before starting the experimental task, participants heard 2 blocks of 10 trials
for familiarization with noise-vocoded speech (one with a single talker, one
with the two simultaneous talkers). Next, they did 3 training blocks of 10
trials each (one block of “maintain” trials, one block of “switch” trials, and
one block of randomly mixed “maintain” and “switch” trials). Training blocks
were repeated until participants achieved ≥50% of trials correct on the
homogenous blocks and ≥40% of trials correct on the mixed block. During
testing, the three experimental conditions (maintain/switch, 10/20 channel
vocoder, and 200/600 ms gap duration) were counterbalanced and randomly
presented in 10 blocks of 32 trials each, for a total of 320 trials.

### Behavioral analysis
As in Experiment 1, listener responses were labeled as “hits” if the button
press occurred between 100 and 1000 ms of the onset of “O” stimuli in the
target stream, responses occurring between 100 and 1000 ms after an “O” onset
*in the masker stream* were labeled as “responses to foils,” and other
responses were considered “false alarms.”  Statistical modeling of sensitivity
and reaction time used the same approach as was used in Experiment 1.

### Analysis of pupil diameter
Analysis of pupil diameter was carried out as in Experiment 1: trials epoched
from −0.5 to 6 seconds, linear interpolation of eye blinks, trial-wise baseline
subtraction and experiment-wise division by standard deviation of pupil size.
Deconvolution and statistical analysis of normalized pupil size data was also
carried out identically to Experiment 1.

## Results

### Sensitivity analysis
Box-and-swarm plots displaying quartile and individual $d^\prime$ values are
shown in Figure \ref{fig-voc-dprime}.  The statistical model indicated
significant main effects for all three trial type manipulations, as seen in
Figure \ref{fig-voc-dprime}a, with effect sizes between 0.2 to 0.5 on a
$d^\prime$ scale.  Model results indicate no significant difference in target
detection between maintain- and switch-attention trials, but did show fewer
responses to foils in maintain-attention trials; a corresponding increase in
$d^\prime$ in the maintain attention condition is seen for nearly all listeners
in Figure \ref{fig-voc-dprime}a.  The model also indicated that listeners were
better at detecting targets in 20-channel trials, but there was no significant
difference in response to foils for the vocoder band manipulation.  For the
switch gap length manipulation, the model indicated much greater response to
foil items in the long gap trials.  The model also indicated a two-way
interaction between gap duration and number of vocoder channels, seen in the
middle column of Figure \ref{fig-voc-dprime}b: the difference in target
detection between 20- and 10-channel trials was greater in the long-gap trials
than in the short-gap trials.  There was also a two-way interaction between gap
duration and the attentional manipulation, seen in the right column of Figure
\ref{fig-voc-dprime}b, and a three-way interaction, shown in Figure
\ref{fig-voc-dprime}c.  These interactions indicated that there were
significantly more responses to foil items in the 10-channel, long-gap,
maintain-attention trials than would be expected in the absence of a three-way
interaction, and both more foil responses and fewer target responses in the
long-gap maintain-attention trials than would be expected if the effects of gap
duration and the attentional manipulation were independent.

![(Color online) Box-and-swarm plots of between-condition differences in listener sensitivity for Experiment 2.  Boxes show first & third quartiles and median values; individual data points correspond to each listener; asterisks indicate comparisons with corresponding coefficients in the statistical model that were significantly different from zero.  (a) Main effects of attention (higher sensitivity in maintain than switch trials), spectral degradation (higher sensitivity in 20-channel than 10-channel vocoded trials), and switch gap duration (higher sensitivity in trials with a short gap).  (b) Two-way interactions: the difference between 20- and 10-channel vocoded trials was greater in the long-gap condition, and the difference between long- and short-gap trials was greater (more negative) in the maintain-attention condition.  (c) Three-way interaction: the difference between long- and short-gap trials in the maintain attention condition was greater (more negative) in the 10-channel vocoded trials than in the 20-channel vocoded trials.  * = _p_<0.05; ** = _p_<0.01; *** = _p_<0.001.\label{fig-voc-dprime}](fig-beh-voc.eps)

### Reaction time
Box-and-swarm plots showing quartile and individual reaction time values are
shown in Figure \ref{fig-voc-rt}.  The statistical model indicated a bias
toward faster responses generally (by 70 ms on average) in long-gap trials, and
a main effect of gap duration on responses to target items, with faster
response times (by an additional 76 ms on average) to targets in long-gap
trials.  No other significant differences in reaction time were observed.
Unlike in Experiment 1, post-hoc tests of reaction time difference between
maintain- and switch-attention trials by slot showed no significant differences
(Welch’s independent *t*-tests, uncorrected: *p*=0.085 for slot 1, *p*=0.22 for
slot 2, *p*=0.097 for slot 3, and *p*=0.76 for slot 4).

![(Color online) Box-and-swarm plots of between-condition differences in reaction time for Experiment 2.  Boxes show first & third quartiles and median values; individual data points correspond to each listener; asterisks indicate comparisons with corresponding coefficients in the statistical model that were significantly different from zero.  (a) Main effects of attention, spectral degradation, and gap duration (faster response time in long-gap trials).  (b) Two-way interactions (no statistically significant differences).  (c) Three-way interaction (no statistically significant differences).  *** = _p_<0.001.\label{fig-voc-rt}](fig-beh-voc-rt.eps)

### Pupillometry
Mean effort as a function of time for the three stimulus manipulations (10/20
vocoder channels, gap duration, and maintain/switch attention trials) are shown
in Figure \ref{fig-voc-pupil}. As in Experiment 1, the attentional manipulation
shows a significant difference between conditions, with switch-attention trials
showing greater effort than maintain-attention trials.  Also as in Experiment
1, effort diverges as soon as listeners have heard the cue and remains higher
throughout the rest of the trial.  There is also a significant difference in
the time course of effort between long- and short-gap trials, though it
manifests as a delay rather than a vertical shift.

![(Color online) Mean ±1 standard error across subjects of deconvolved pupil size for (a) 10- versus 20-band vocoded stimuli, (b) short versus long mid-trial switch gap durations, and (c) maintain- versus switch-attention trials, with trial schematics showing the timecourse of stimulus events (compare to Fig. \ref{fig-voc-trial}). Hatched region shows temporal span of statistically significant differences between time series. The late-trial divergence in (b) is attributable to the delay of stimulus presentation in the long-gap condition; the onset of divergence in (c) aligns with the end of the cue, as in Experiment 1 (see Fig. \ref{fig-rev-pupil}c). a.u. = arbitrary units (deconvolution procedure yields “kernel weights” at each time point, which are interpretable as listener effort).\label{fig-voc-pupil}](pupil-fig-voc.eps)

## Discussion

The model of listener sensitivity showed main effects of the spectral
degradation and attentional manipulations in the expected directions: listener
sensitivity was better when there were more vocoder channels and when mid-trial
switching of attention was not required.  However, the results of the gap
duration manipulation were unexpected; based on past findings that auditory
attention switches take between 300 and 400 ms,[@LarsonLee2013a;
@LarsonLee2013b] we hypothesized that a gap duration of 200 ms would cause
listeners to fail to detect targets in the immediate post-gap position (i.e.,
timing slot 3).  We did see slower reaction time in the short-gap trials, but
sensitivity was actually *better* in the short-gap trials than in the long-gap
ones (Figure \ref{fig-voc-dprime}a, right column).  Moreover, according to the
statistical model this effect was driven by a difference in the rate of
responses to *foil items*, not targets, and appears to be limited to the
maintain-attention trials (see Figure \ref{fig-voc-dprime}b, right column), and
more specifically, to the maintain-attention trials with 10-channel vocoded
stimuli (see Figure \ref{fig-voc-dprime}b, middle column, and
\ref{fig-voc-dprime}c, left column). Post-hoc analysis showed that this
difference in foil response rate was significant in timing slots 2 and 3 (i.e.,
both before and after the switch gap).  
<!-- (Welch’s independent *t*-tests, uncorrected: *p*=TODO slot 1, *p*=XXX slot
2, *p*=XXX slot 3, *p*=XXX slot 4).  This difference in foil response rate in
slot 2 (before the switch gap) cannot be attributed to the gap duration
manipulation (since the manipulation was uncued), making definitive
interpretation of this result difficult.  Nevertheless, it may be the case that
(for the slot 3 difference at least) listeners had difficulty in the long-gap
condition selecting the correct stream to attend to, and/or had difficulty
suppressing responses to foil items in the competing stream.   -->

A possible explanation for the decreased sensitivity in the long-gap condition
is that the long-gap condition interfered with auditory streaming, the
10-channel condition also interfered with streaming, and when both conditions
occurred simultaneously there was a strong effect on listener ability to group
the pre- and post-gap letters into a single stream (i.e., to preserve stream
identity across the gap).  Larson and Lee showed a similar “drop off” in
performance in their maintain-attention trials when the gap duration reached
800 ms;[@LarsonLee2013a] perhaps the spectral degradation in our stimuli
decreased listeners’ tolerance for gaps in the stream, causing performance to
drop off at shorter (600 ms) gap lengths.  However, this explanation still does
not account for the finding that the 10-channel plus long-gap difficulty seems
to only occur in the maintain-attention trials.  One might speculate that the
act of switching attention at the mid-trial gap effectively “fills in” the gap,
making the temporal disconnect between pre- and post-gap letters less
noticeable, and thereby preserving attended stream identity across a longer gap
duration than would be possible if attention were maintained on a single
source.  In other words, if listeners must conceive of “attended stream” as a
source that undergoes a change in voice quality partway through the trial, the
additional cognitive effort required to make the switch might result in *more
accurate* post-gap stream selection, whereas the putatively less effortful task
of maintaining attention to a consistent source could lead to *less accurate*
post-gap stream selection when stream formation is already difficult (due to
strong spectral degradation) and stream interruptions are long.  <!-- If that
is true, then (paradoxically) listeners could better “maintain” attention to a
consistent source by actively disengaging and re-engaging from that source at
the edges of temporally predictable caesuras. --> Further study of the temporal
dynamics of auditory attention switching is needed to clarify how listeners’
intended behavior affects stream stability across temporal caesuras of varying
lengths, and how this process interacts with signal degradation or quality.

# General discussion

The goal of these experiments was to see whether the pupillary response would
reflect listener effort associated with the need to switch attention between
talkers who were spatially separated (Experiment 1), or talkers separable only
by talker voice quality and pitch (Experiment 2).  The overall finding was that
attention switching is clearly reflected in the pupillary signal as an increase
in dilation that begins either as soon as listeners are aware that a switch
will be required, or as soon as they begin planning the switch.

A secondary goal was to reproduce past findings regarding the pupillary
response to degraded *sentential* stimuli using a simpler stimulus paradigm
(spoken letter sequences).  In fact, we failed to see any effect of stimulus
degradation, neither when degrading the temporal cues for spatial separation
through simulated reverberation, nor when degrading the signal’s spectral
resolution through noise vocoding.  We believe the key difference lies in our
choice of stimuli: detecting a target in sequence of spoken letters is not the
same kind of task as computing the meaning of a well-formed sentence, and our
results suggest that simply detecting targets among a small set of possible
stimulus tokens does not engage the same neural circuits or invoke the same
kind of mental effort or load that is responsible for pupillary dilations in
the sentence comprehension tasks of Winn and colleagues.[@WinnEtAl2015]  In
this light, one might say of Winn and colleagues’ findings that the signal
degradation itself is not the proximal cause of the pupil dilation, but rather
the additional cogitation or effort necessary to understand the speech stimulus
when the speech is degraded.

The finding from Experiment 2 showing better sensitivity in short-gap trials was unexpected.  If our speculation is correct — that signal degradation
reduces listener tolerance of gaps in auditory stream formation and preservation — then this finding may have profound implications for listeners experiencing hearing loss and cognitive decline.  Specifically, slowed attention switching due to cognitive decline would mean that listeners need longer gaps to facilitate switching attention among multiple interlocutors, but decreased signal quality due to degradation of the auditory periphery could lead to greater difficulty in stream preservation across long gaps.

<!--
**TODO: following is Bonnie’s draft text, not yet revised.**
The primary question addressed in this study was whether pupil dilation could
serve as a useful physiological measure in investigations of auditory attention.
The results of both Experiment I and II demonstrate that greater pupil dilation
is observed on trials that required the switching of attention. The increase in
dilation started shortly after the auditory cue to switch was presented and was
consistent with task performance measures. Decreased accuracy on the letter
recognition task was seen on switch trials in Experiment I and II and reaction
time was also longer in Experiment I. Additional bottom-up stimulus
manipulations which included spectral and temporal degradation, switch gap
duration, and whether it was a male-male or male-female target-masker
combination did not affect the amount of pupil dilation observed during this
top-down attentional task.

That the pupillary response is sensitive to the switching of auditory attention
is consistent with past studies showing that it reflects cognitive load during
tasks involving language, memory, and attentional processing. It is also
consistent with the results of Koelewijn et al. (2014), which found that the
dividing of auditory attention results in greater pupil dilation. However, an
important aspect of whether pupil dilation would be a useful measure is whether
it provides information beyond accuracy and reaction time. In studies of speech
perception, pupillometry has been shown to add a fuller characterization of
listening effort, especially when task performance is high. Winn et al. (2015)
demonstrated that although intelligibility on a sentence perception task was at
ceiling, listening effort as measured by pupil dilation, continued to vary with
spectral resolution. Similarly, in Kuchinsky et al. (2011) the interaction
between signal-to-noise ratio and lexical competition was seen in the pupillary
response, even in trials that were correct.

In this current study, pupil dilation revealed information on the time course of
the attentional switch that was not captured by task performance. On switch
trials, pupil dilation started shortly after the auditory cue was presented,
well before the actual attentional switch occurred. This suggests that listeners
were preparing and listening differently from the start of the switch trials and
not only during the attentional switch. Larson and Lee (2013a) found behavioral
evidence of this preparatory phase on a similar task where listeners were
required to maintain or switch attention between two streams of 6 letters.
Performance was worse on switch trials, even when the target letter occurred
before the switch gap. The pupillometry data from this study is consistent with
the behavioral evidence from Larson and Lee (2013a) and further illustrates the
time course by showing the divergence of the pupil trace on switch trials
following the auditory cue at the start of the trial.

Another potential application for pupillometry in studies of auditory attention
would be to help tease apart exogenous and endogenous influences on the ability
to selectively attend to one stream or another. Two bottom-up stimulus
manipulations that influenced task demand were introduced in each experiment. In
Experiment I, increased pupil dilation was predicted on trials with greater
spectral degradation and shorter switch gap duration, regardless of whether
listeners were required to switch or maintain attention. However, this was not
observed in the results of Experiment I. To further confirm this finding, the
task was repeated with two different bottom-up stimulus manipulations in
Experiment II. Greater pupil dilation was predicted with reverberation and a
male-male target-masker combination. Once again, no difference in pupillary
response was observed on these trials despite the fact that the bottom-up
manipulations created “hard” and “easy” trials, which were expected to influence
pupil dilation. In both experiments, the pupillary response continued to track
the attentional task.

While the effect of many of these manipulations on pupil dilation have not been
previously studied, this unexpected finding is inconsistent with the results of
Winn et al. (2015) showing a systematic increase in pupil dilation with the
decrease in spectral resolution of speech stimuli. A similar vocoding strategy
was used in Experiment I of Winn et al. and this current study but Winn et al.
had 5 vocoder conditions (Normal, 32, 16, 8, and 4 channels) as opposed to the
two in this study (10 and 20 channels). One possibility for why greater pupil
dilation was not observed in this study may be that the difference between the
10 and 20 channels was not enough to elicit a change in pupil diameter. Another
related possibility is that 10 channels still provided sufficient spectral
information for the letter recognition task so pupil dilation was not affected
(Shannon et al., 1995). However, the results of Winn et al. show that increased
pupil dilation is observed even with 16 and 32 channels. Furthermore, lower
d-prime and longer reaction times were seen on the 10 versus 20 channel trials
suggesting that a perceptual difference in the two vocoder conditions does
exist. As the relationship between how much pupil dilation should be expected
with how much spectral degradation is unknown, it is difficult to further assess
these reasons.

Another possible factor is that the pupillary responses in this study were
recorded in a completely darkened booth in front of a black computer screen with
no additional sources of light. Baseline pupillary dilation in these conditions
would be on the higher end of each subject’s pupil dilation range. It is
possible that calibrating the luminance of the computer screen to elicit pupil
dilation at the midpoint of each subject’s dilation range during baseline might
increase the sensitivity of the pupillary response to small changes in spectral
resolution such as presented in this current study (Winn et al., 2015).

Finally, it is also possible that the top-down attentional task overrode the
sensitivity of the pupillary response to bottom-up stimulus differences. The
participants were given explicit instructions to either maintain or switch
attention while performing the letter recognition task. For this reason, the
pupillary response may have continued to track attention but not the bottom-up
stimulus differences. If this were the case, pupillometry has the potential to
be sensitive to either top-down or bottom-up differences, which would greatly
facilitate investigations of the relationship between exogenous and endogenous
attention. Carefully designed studies that differentiate between top-down and
bottom-up factors are needed to further investigate this possibility.

The two methods employed to analyze the pupillary responses in this study was
modeled after Wierda et al. (2012). Pupil responses were normalized with
reference to baseline dilation and also deconvolved with the pupil response
function. Deconvolution of the pupillary response is suggested to have greater
physiological relevance and statistical sensitivity (Hoeks and Levelt, 1993).
Wierda et al. also showed that tracking of attentional pulses with high temporal
resolution is possible with deconvolution of the pupillary response. In this
present study however, only small differences in the two analysis methods were
observed. In Experiment II, deconvolution of the pupillary response revealed a
marginally significant difference (p=0.038) in dilation on reverberant trials
that was not seen in the normalized pupil responses. Nevertheless, because
target letters were presented at a relatively slow rate (seconds) compared to in
Wierda et al. (300 ms), it is possible that the benefits of deconvolution were
not seen with this paradigm. Further comparison of pupillometry analysis methods
including growth curve analysis (Winn et al. 2015, Kuchinsky et al. 2011),
deconvolution (Wierda et al. 2012, Hoeks and Levelt, 1993), as well as more
traditional measures of mean and peak pupil dilation (Zekveld et al., 2011;
Zekveld et al., 2013) should be investigated in future studies to determine
optimal analysis methods for different experimental paradigms.

Many foundational studies have now been conducted in the auditory domain
demonstrating that the pupillary response is sensitive to listening effort
during speech perception (Koelewijn et al. 2012; Zekveld et al. 2010) and to
both the switching and dividing of auditory attention (Koelewijn et al., 2014;
Koelewijn et al. 2015). The potential for clinical application with older adults
with hearing loss (Kuchinsky et al., 2011; Zekveld et al., 2011; Koelewijn et
al. 2014) and users of cochlear implants (Winn et al., 2015) has also been
demonstrated. The next phase of studies are required to further establish the
parameters of applying pupillometry to auditory investigations. While this
current study shows evidence that pupil dilation can be used to indicate when a
switch in attention has occurred, many questions remain for further study.

Pupillometry has been used in many studies as a physiological measure of
cognitive load. By increasing task demands that involve language, short-term
memory, attention or other higher-level cognitive abilities such as math, an
increase in pupil diameter is observed. A fundamental question that remains is
how each of these cognitive processes can be differentiated from the overall
cognitive load. This understanding is critical for investigations looking at the
neural mechanisms of auditory attention that may be less relevant for those
motivated clinically. If pupil dilation is elicited through the addition of
language or memory demands as opposed to attention, different neural networks
will be recruited. A general framework to define the relationship between
cognitive load, listening effort, language, working memory, and auditory
attention would be a good starting point to guide future studies. Finally,
further investigations of the underlying physiology of the pupillary response,
especially as elicited by auditory attention are also a priority.
 -->

# Acknowledgments
This research was supported by NIH grant R01-DC013260 to AKCL and NIH LRP
awards to EDL and DRM. The authors are grateful to two anonymous reviewers and
the members of *[LABS]^N^* for helpful suggestions on earlier drafts of this
paper.
